NARRATOR: In the pleasant summer of 1914, the American community was , was finding it easier and happier than ever before in its history. A Washington cream pie. Washington cream pie? You like it too, ? NARRATOR: In America'sbrave little world of 1914, a self-contained and contented people would look back with satisfaction on nearly a century and a half of unparalleledprogress and prosperity. American industry lead the world, and was rapidly increasing its lead. To contribute to and share inthe wealth of a growing nation, immigrants from every part of the world were still flocking to US shores, bringing up their childrenin the American community as new first generation Americans. Most communities of any size in 1914 could boast of their own daily newspaper, whose editor championed their causes, helped fight their battles. But Americans of 1914 werelittle interested in news outside their own communityand their own nation. The country was still debatingafter two years the merits of the New Freedom,slogan of Woodrow Wilson, the first Democrat to occupy the White House since Grover Cleveland. The Panama Canal, in whichthe whole nation took pride, was scheduled finally to be opened in mid August. And the man most responsiblefor the canal, ex-president Theodore Roosevelt, was still a powerful figure on the US political scene. The regular Army of the United States totaled just under 100,000men in the summer of 1914, and many a US citizen feltthat even this number was excessive for a force that had little to do but chase Mexican bandits. Heavier than aircraft were undergoing tests by a few young andfar-sighted army officers, who hoped eventually to put the new invention to some useful military purpose. Fast achieving popularitywas the Hesitation Canter, a startling newoutgrowth of the Turkey trot. In 1914, young citizens of America were looking forward with highhope for the future of a land which was still a new world. It was a settled and ordered world, in which youth, keen and confident, saw limitless opportunity. There were new standards andnew ideals, new entertain and new pleasures. Well, just as the train came to a trestle, she got to the window and jumped out. Well? Well, that's the way it ended until next week. Isn't that just like them? NARRATOR: An earnest people,living in a land grown powerful and great, wereonly beginning to realize how truly great their nation was. Until the arrival of thepaper train on the morning of June 1914, Europe and Europe's troubles seemed very far away. Say, Harry, is an Archduke likea prince, or is he like a king? Search me. NARRATOR: In the days that quickly followed the first declaration ofwar, as country after country mobilized and marched, the news that mattered most was the news of Europe andits spreading battle fronts. It was America's foreign-bornwho first felt the impact of the war in Europe. And they tried as best they could to explain it to their American friends. To them, war was a sad, familiar Old World story, the age-old uponthe lands from which they came. Anna, , look. Right here in the paper. A registered letter for you, Mrs. Kovacs. Looks like something from the old country. You can sign for it. It'd be odd to sign for this. You don't want me to bringit back again, do you? Sign right here. Thank you. Goodbye. Hello, Anna. What are you doing here? Joe, the postman brought it this morning. What does it say, Joe? It's for the army. We'll talk it over when we get home, Mama. Any from Austria? I don't know where they're from, the "Pathe Weekly" is on now. You got Army papers too, huh, John? Yeah, come today. What's your take? Not for me. That's Old Country business. I'm staying in America with the wife and kids. What you going to do? If you don't go now, you'llnever get back to Old Country. I go Monday, maybe. Joe. Now, Mama, in times like this, a man's got to do what he thinks is right. When do you go, Joe? I take the train for New York this afternoon. Did you ask them about the money? Well, Anna, they said it's hard to get money through from the Old Country now. What are we going to live on? Oh, Papa. I'm sorry. Come, we go. NARRATOR: With the invasionof neutral Belgium, Americans awoke to the fulland terrible implications of a modern war. A taxi cab army, rushed from Paris, brought the miracle of the Marne. Britain's contemptibles,as the Kaiser called them, were desperately holding the Flanders' front. American military men knewthat Germany had devoted all her energies for 20 years tobuilding up the greatest war machine the world had everseen, armies that were now systematically destroyingin their advance the towns, the cities, and the homes of a simple, peace-loving people. And there were signs in the American community that the nation was aroused. Razor all right, Congressman? Mm-mm. John, I'm not going to find it so easy to be neutral in thought. JOHN: Mm-mm. NARRATOR: Already, the war in Europe was finding its way into theeveryday lives of Americans. Americans of every age. H2O. Twice, please Anna. Say, I'm sorry to hear thatyou're quitting school. Do you have to? What else can I do? I've got to help Mother. I don't understand Pop doing what he did. Well, I suppose you can't blameanybody for being patriotic. But he didn't have to go over there. It wasn't his war. The war will be over ina couple of months anyway. That's what my father says, and he used to be in the German army. I suppose he thinks theGermans are going to win. They win every day, don't they? If your old man likes Germany so much, he'd better go back there. That goes for you go too. Never mind him, Freddy. Don't let that guy get your goat. The army advanced along the whole front again today, in some placesnearly five kilometers. You're not eating much tonight, Fred. What's the matter? Nothing Mama, I'm just not hungry. Anna Kovacs has had to quit school. Her father's been called by the Austrian army, and now she has to work. So? Dad, it's getting so that all of you and everybody else talk aboutis this war all the time. Today, I said that you hadbeen in the German army, and that you thought theGermans would win in two months. I didn't mean anything. It almost started a free-for-all, Father. That's too bad, Frederick. Perhaps I should be more careful. It is very wrong for any ofus to get personally agitated about the wars of far away. We are in American. President Wilson said, this is a war with which we have nothing to do. That is how we all must try to feel. NARRATOR: Under the personalcommand of Kaiser Wilhelm II, the armies of imperialGermany seemed invincible in the summer of 1914. And Americans began to realizethat belief in a just cause was not enough against superior manpower and superior armaments. The bravery of the Belgians,fighting on To hold the channel ports, further heightenedAmerica's desire to help these stricken people. Most Americans feel that the invasion of Belgium was the most barbarous act ever committed by a civilized nation. We are not here to discuss the rights and wrongs of the European war. We are here to help its innocentvictims, little children, helpless and starving. The Committee for the Reliefof Belgium under the able chairmanship of Herbert Hoover,can feed a Belgian child for a month on a $5 bill. It is up to us to see thathe gets those $5 bills. Yes, and $10s, and $20s, and $50s. NARRATOR: A generous people had assumed its first responsibility of the war, with the help of a young miningengineer named Herbert Hoover. Within three months, he had organized a fleet of 35 vessels, carrying more than a million worth of food a week to Belgium. As the war entered its first winter, American contributions werekeeping alive 10 million homeless, starving people, helpless wards of the one nation of the world still able to feed and care for them. Aren't these Professor Carter's? Why, of course they are. Do you suppose he'sreally bought a new suit? We can't send these old things to the Belgians with St. Luke's name on them. And those poor Belgian women. -- I can't bear to think of them. Well, I just can't understand it. Why, Dora. We all know German people. Some of us have German friends. Look at the Bensingers. They're as nice as anybody could be. NARRATOR: --with Europe's war. America was a neutralnation, but neutral nations on the high seas were beingopenly and flagrantly violated by Germany. What a way for a civilizednation to fight a war. Why shouldn't they sink English ships? So why don't the submarines give warning, so the crews will have a chance to get into life boats. The Germans have got to sinkships if they're carrying munitions for the Allies. And suppose they have Americans on them? They shouldn't be there. The German government has warned them. be there. Huh. Don't make me-- NARRATOR: But far more fateful questions of international lawwas the submarines' steadily mounting toll of human lives. Men like Theodore Roosevelt were now demanding forceful action to uphold the nation's traditional freedom of the seas. But few Americans wouldbelieve that their rights were seriously threatened. Clarence. And they sunk the "Lusitania." What? Tell circulation we have an extra coming on. How many Americans aboard? 228. 96-point banner. Play up the American angle. The Germans had run a warningto "Lusitania" passengers. What do you mean? An ad in "The New York Times." In "The Times?" Have you got a copy? I didn't think they'd dare to sink her. The warning of the German embassy had attracted little notice. It was unthinkable that Germanywould sink the "Lusitania." Her sailing had been set for a Saturday for noon. On her passenger list were someof the proudest names of two continents, for the "Lusitania" was queen of the great fleet. It was to be a gay and festive voyage. Nearly 2,000 souls were aboard. 1,200 never reached shore. No single disaster in half a century had stirred Americanemotions more profoundly. If Wilson stands for this,he'll stand for anything. Stand for what? Stand for murder. Murder of 114 Americans. . MAN: An American citizen has the right to travel anywhere he wants to. We oughta lick the Kaisernow and have it over with. You're gonna have a hard time . They don't care how many Americans get killed. And what do they say about the "Lusitania." Well, in Montana, they thinkif a man goes out in the street when there's shooting going on, it's his own fault if he gets hit. NARRATOR: Anger and indignation,deep and mounting, swept every community in the land. Throughout the nation on the following Sabbath, there were memorial services for the men, the women, and the childrenwho were the "Lusitania's" martyred dead. Well, boys, what's on your mind? We came to find out what you're going to do about the "Lusitania." To tell the truth, I hadn'tthought of doing anything. John, you're our Congressman. You know how they're feeling. Don't you think you oughtto go talk with President Wilson about this thing? Well, now boys, you don'twalk in on the President just that way. He's already said he would Germany to strict accountability. John, we've been hearingabout strict accountability for a long time. It seems to mean that when a German U-boat kills some more Americans,the President just sends another note. What do you want to do? You ought to go to Wilson,and tell him he's got to act, and act quick. All right. I can go to Wilson. Are you boys willing to go to war? That's not the point John,and you know it isn't. The point is you want to do something, but you don't want to do theonly thing the Germans would understand, war. this country isn't ready to fight a war, even if it wanted to. Just suppose I do go to the President? Suppose he says, all right, ifyou want a war, you'll get it. Do you want your boy to go to war, Ed? Will you fight? I know how you feel. I feel the same way. But it's war or nothing. And I still think it ought to be nothing. NARRATOR:US opinion was still deeply divided. To demands for action, Woodrow Wilton answered, there is such a thing as a nation being too proud to fight. It was a bitterly disputed phrase. But other US citizens were going to war. Across the border, thousands ofyou Americans of military age were joining famed Canadianregiments-- the Black Watch and Princess Pats-- to fightalongside Canadians in a cause they believed to be just. Bought and sent overseasby the contributions of US communities, driven by Americanswho paid their own expenses, nearly 100 ambulances by the end of 1915 were on the battlefields of France. Bearing the name of a Frenchsoldier who had helped America to win her independence, the Lafayette Escadrille was an elite corps of US volunteers. In the American community,emotion for the Allied cause was running high. And in a town as important as this, with the mainline railroad, thereservoir, the college and all, they'd be sure to have at least one spy. Honestly, Dora. Do you really believe ElizabethBensinger's husband is a spy? Where there's smoke, there's fire. Hello, everybody. WOMEN: Hello. Hello. Hello, Mrs. Averill. Hello, Elizabeth. How are you? I'm fine. How are you? Elizabeth? Yes? May I speak to you and Hilda a moment please? Why, certainly. Hilda? I thought I ought to tellyou that since we are working on bandages for the Allies, we all feel that perhaps you andHilda could make yourselves more useful somewhere else. I'm not quite sure that Iunderstand what you mean, Dora. With feeling as it is aboutthe Germans, I'm very sorry. But I'm sure you will avoidunpleasantness if you go. Come, Hilda. NARRATOR: In every US community by 1915, the lines were slowly being drawn between peace at any priceand intervention in the war. When I hear these fools shouting about being too proud tofight, it makes my blood boil. Don't they know that the Allies are fighting to save our own civilization? I'm glad you feel that way, Dad. Because I want to jointhe Lafayette Escadrille. What? I want to join the LafayetteEscadrille and go to France. Well, Walter, that's a fine sentiment. But I'm afraid it isn't very practical. You're hardly old enough for a thing like that. Of course I am, Dad. They'll take you at 18. But Walter, what about your college? Dad, how can I keep my mind on studies with a war going on that's going to affect the whole future of the world? You won't much voice in thefuture of the world, Walter, if you go over there and don't come back. I'll have to take a chance on that. A lot of other people have. Why did you have totalk to me first, Walter? Well, it-- Because my father's German? Walter, I love my father. I'd do anything in theworld rather than hurt him, or let anybody hurt him. I know he wants the Germansto win the war, but I don't. What do you want, Hilda? I want you to go toFrance, if you want to go. I'd be proud of you, Walter. So long, boy. Take care of yourself. You've been great, Dad. I know how you feel about it. That's all right, Son. Goodbye, Mom. I'll write you every week. Don't you worry. Hilda. You NARRATOR: 600,000causalities at . A million dead and wounded on the Sommes. And on the minds of men, therelentless pressure of war, dragging on into a third summer. At Jutland, in the summer of 1916, the British Navy to cover in the greatest sea battle of all time. And for the first time, Americans realized how great was their dependence on the might of the Royal Navy. The whole thing boils down to this, John. If we had a big army navy,we wouldn't have to worry about getting into war. I'm afraid there are someof my fellow congressmen who will agree with, Jack. Well, they're wrong. And if congressmen won't dosomething about preparedness, we'll have to do it ourselves. Say, Dan, I want you to putsomething in your paper for me. What about? You know PlattsburghTraining Camp Teddy Roosevelt and General Woodruff started? I'm going to have one here. What for? There's a war going on in Europe. You know as well as I do that ifFrance and England are licked, we're next. You've been a soldier too long, Jack. Nobody's coming over here to fight us. Maybe not. But suppose we have to goover there to fight them? You know that's not going to happen. NARRATOR: By 1916, WoodrowWilton now a candidate for reelection, could no longerignore the growing demand for national defense, andhe marched at the head of a Preparedness Parade. Republican candidate was SupremeCourt Justice Charles Evans Hughes, advocate of a strong andforthright US foreign policy. That is the real issue, the only real issue in this campaign. The President has kept us out of war. He has sent notes to thewarring nations of Europe. That's all he has done, is send notes. Yes, the President has sent notes. But he has not sent one singleAmerican boy to his death on the battlefields. 11:10 PM. Madison, Wisconsin. Charles Evans Hughes has tiedWisconsin by large plurality. 11:15 PM. The Associated Press reports that with five states still unreported, Hughes is leading Wilson by a now margin. He's to a real President of the United States, Charles Evans Hughes. Here's to Charlie Hughes, drink down, drink down. Here's to Charlie Hughes,drink her down, drink her down. Here's to Charlie Hughes, he'sin Woodrow Wilson's shoes. Drink her down, drink her down,drink her down, down, down. NARRATOR: With the campaignslogan "Kept Us Out of War," Woodrow Wilton was re-elected. The war in Europe had longsince become a merciless process of attrition. To break the stalemate, Britainhad introduced the tank. Germany was using liquid fire. The war went on, into another winter, bringing death to some 5,000 men each day. War had already touched theAmerican community in many ways by the summer of 1916. The Lafayette Escadrilleis all Americans, isn't it? Yes, sir. Now, what would happen to you if the United States should go into the war. Well, I understand we'll be commissioned in the US Army flying corps. Hello, Hal. Hello, Mr. Meredith. It's good to see you. It's good to see you back againall in one piece, isn't it? Sure is. Certainly is. Hiya, Hal. Hello, Betsy. How are you? Swell. Boy, I guess the last thing you ever thought when you graduatedwas that you'd be an aviator in the French army. Say how old do you have to be to go to France? Hello, Anna. How's the party? All right. What's the trouble, Anna? Mother got a cablegram this morning. My father was killed. Anna. Do you think WalterAverill will be able to get back to America on his leave? I don't know. He's a sub-lieutenant now, and they may not be able to spare him. Colonel. Hut. Hut. Left shoulder. Right shoulder. Quiet in the rank. You men are at attention. And while I'm on thesubject, you might as well get it through your heads right now but you're not out here for a vacation. You're here to learn to do a job, the job of defending your country. Maybe it won't be very longbefore you have to do that job, and do it right. Dismissed. Hello, Dad. Hello, Ralph. Hello, Mom. Why, Ralph, you must be tired to death. No, I'm fine. This is fun. Do they give you plenty to eat? Sure. All I can hold. Don't worry, Mom. Oh, Ralph, I can't help it. I hate to see you in that uniform. I hate it all. Aw, Mom. Dad, you like it, don't you? You look fine, Ralph. Just fine. In Europe on a dozen separate battle fronts by the winter of 1916, 4 million men had met death in ways new and dreadful. And Germany had introducedthe most terrible of all the First World War's newweapons-- poison gas, chlorine and to choke the lungs and throat, mustard to burn the eyes and skin. The use of poison gas seemedhorrible and barbarous than any other single actionof the German high command. And Americans were fast reaching a decision. And has also received the for bravery in action. Can you imagine that guy, Hal Fisher? With his name all over the paper? Boy, I guess I was born just a little too late. Don't worry. We're going to get our chance yet. Did I tell you I'm gettinginto the Naval Reserve? Naval Reserve. You oughta be in the National Guard. I'll bet we go over, thefirst week, we're in the war. Anna, I think I'm going tosign up in the Marine Corps. Well, I want to do something. We're going to be in this war. Fred, what will your father say? I don't know, but I'm going to do it. NARRATOR: By now, pacifist songswere finding a little favor. SINGER: Hello, my dear. I heard a mother murmur through her tears. I didn't raise my boy to be a soldier. I brought him up to be my pride and joy. Waiter. Waiter. What's the trouble, sir? How much is this? Why can't you make up your mind whether you're Germans or Americans? Come on, let's get out of here. SINGER: It's time to put the sword and gun away. There'd be no war today ifmothers all would say I didn't raise my boy to be a soldier. NARRATOR: Fires and explosionsof mysterious origin had plagued the nation'sindustrial regions for two years, and Americans were now beginning to realize that these disasterswere not all accidents. Thank you. How do you, sir? How do you do, Professor Bensinger? Am I disturbing you? Not at all. Is there something I can do for you? If you could give me a few minutes. Certainly. the German embassy. Yes? Professor Bensinger, it is imperative we stop the shipment of American munitions to France and England. As a German who is a respectedmember of this community, your influence can help the fatherland. Herr , my home is now in America. I have a wife and twochildren who are Americans. If only for their sake, I cannot take sides. The war in Europe is a terrible thing. Actually, I wish I could do something to help the fatherland. But I must be clear to you, I cannot. You know I must report your answer to Germany, Professor Bensinger? NARRATOR: Many Americanswere beginning to suspect that the German ambassador, Johann von Bernstroff was directing planned sabotageon a nationwide scale. An explosion of munitions onBlack Tom Island, New Jersey have rocked an area of 70 miles. Another explosion at Kingsland, New Jersey destroyed in a few minutesmillions of dollars worth of shells and ammunition. Time and time again came evidence and sabeteurs, well-organized and financed, were attempting the systematic destruction of US munition plants. The violence of war hadtouched the nation's shores. And America's traditional sense of security was shaken to the core. By 1917, Americans were facing the inevitable. I think most Americans feelabout the way I do, John. You know I've never believed the propaganda. I've never been frightenedby spies, and I've hated war. But the time has come when we've got to fight for the decent,civilized things in life. It's just that I hate to thinkthat I'll ever have to vote to put this country into war. NARRATOR: More and more, the warin Europe coming into the homes of the American community. Mind the office for awhile, will you, Eddie? I've gotta deliver a message across town. Can't I deliver it for you? I think I'd better deliver this one myself. Gee, Walter Averill. We'll run this one, George. The death of Walter Averillseems to have brought the war in Europe very close. Perhaps this war is no concern of ours. Perhaps we should be in it. There are sincere thinkingmen and women on both sides. And we are under terrifyingpressure on this question. From England and France and Germany come all kinds of reports. Most of them are half truths. Some of them are lies. But Walter Averill didn'tgo to France for lies. He didn't go because of the lurid tales about the Hun and . I think Walter believed in his heart the same as I believe in mine that there is a basic democratic principleand a primitive might makes right instinct. And today, these two are fighting to see which will survive. I think that's the fight forwhich young Walter Averill was willing to give up his life. NARRATOR: Like an openchallenge to the United States in the first weeks of 1917 cameGermany's declaration that she was resuming unrestricted warfare against the vessels of all nations, belligerent and neutral. Now the German government tells us that she will let us send just one ship a week across the Atlantic. We are told when it must leave,when it must arrive, and where. We are told to paint stripes on it. That it must fly a flag of red and white checks like a farmer's table cloth. I think I can truthfully saythat no man in this house has advocated caution more consistently, has more consistently championed the cause of neutrality and peace. Now, it seems that the effortsof all of us may be in vain. If they are to be in vain, then I say this. Let us thank God that we are on the side of justice and the right. NARRATOR: came USAmbassador James W. Gerard, and his disturbing rumorsthat Germans were attempting to promote an attack through Mexico against the United States. The nation was tense with expectation. But on the cold March day of Woodrow Wilson's second inaugural, the nation's men of state, as well as all the solemnthousands who crowded into Washington, feltthat they were witnessing the close of one era in American history, the beginning of another. By March, the US flag had been all but driven from the Atlantic by German submarine. For America, freedom of theseas had ceased to exist. As the first important act of his second term, Woodrow Wilson signed an executive order which armed all US merchantships with naval guns. It was another compromise,called by Woodrow Wilson armed neutrality. Congressman ? Good evening. This is Western Union. I have a telegram for you from Washington signed Carter, Sergeant at arms. The message reads, three more American ships, having been torpedoed, the President has advanced the date of aspecial session of Congress through April 2. That's signed Carter, Sergeant at Arms. NARRATOR: Armed neutrality had failed. The American peoplelooked to the White House. For three years, Woodrow Wiltonhad compromised with Germany. And each new compromisehad brought new indignity. Now, his people wanted war. On the evening of April2, 1917, the entire nation awaited Woodrow Wilson's fateful answer. The answer came. Calling upon the nationto mobilize its resources and its manpower, WoodrowWilton declared that America had no quarrel with the German people, sought no dominion, and no conquest. But the Imperial German government had subjected the rights andthe ideals of the United States to such violation as no nationof free men could endure. It's a great speech so far. Here's the end of it now. For democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority to havea voice in their government. For the rights andliberties of small nations. For a universal dominionof right by such a concert of free peoples as shall bring peace and safety to all nations,and make the world itself at last free. To such a task, we can dedicateour lives and our fortune with the pride of those whoknow that the day has come when America is privileged to spendher blood for the principles which gave her birth, and happiness, and the peace which she has treasured. God helping her, she can do no other. OK, George. Three column box on the front page. Run it over. Head it "The President's WarMessage," with a main head, "Wilson Calls For War." Aye, aye, sir. Date of birth? February 10, 1899. Place of birth? Miles City, Montana. Boys, I'm not going tomake a speech here today. You're leaving home to begin the long trek to France. No words of mine can tell youwhat you're going to fight for. You all know. The only thing I can sayis we're all proud of you. Good bye, and good luck. NARRATOR: With serious purpose, the nation dug in for the biggest job it had ever tackled. Starting with a regulararmy of 130,000 and 70,000 half-trained, ill-equipped reserves, the United States undertook a mobilization of manpower and resourceswithout precedent in any age or any time. To equip America's soldierswas US industry's first job. Production began on 14 millionuniforms, 27 million pairs of shoes, 3 and 1/2 millionrifles and bayonets, a quarter of a million machine guns. In the nation's war effort, every citizen was to take a part. Ed, how about putting me to work as one of your four minute men. You young fellows havemore than you can handle. And I'd like to help in this war too. Well, Dr. Hatfield, it's pretty strenuous. Four or five speeches a day. That doesn't worry me a bit. I've been preaching sermons since you were a boy in knee pants. All right. When can you start? Start now. NARRATOR: Through liberty loans,the American people raised the huge sum of $24 billion. Within three months afterthe declaration of war came the draft, the firstmilitary conscription since the war between the states. 24 million men of militaryage registered for war service and waited for their numbers to come up. In the 19 months of war, there were to be three drawings of the draft lottery. Is that you, stranger? Yup. I had a hunch my number was due up. Look, there's another one. NARRATOR: By the spring of 1918, a nation that for half a centuryhad not fought a major war had called nearly 3 millionof its citizens to the colors. Another 3 million men wereat work in US war industries. The biggest job was steel, and more steel. Steel for big shell. More steel for the big guns. With its experience in supplyingFrench and British armies, American industry in the first year produced 1 million tons of munition. Meanwhile, in France, Frenchand British manpower continued to hold off the powerful war machine, for their new ally 3,000 milesaway was unprepared, and could not send the trained men so desperately needed to stop the greatGerman drive of late 1917. It was not until early 1918that America's first million were equipped and in training. Still ahead were weeks of body-hardening marches, long, precious weeks oftraining for trench warfare, for going over the top. Crews for convoys and submarine patrol. Crews for transports. Transferred to the Army were theNavy's regiments of US Marines, soldier/sailors who were to take their places on the battlefields of France. MAN: Private Bensinger,report to commanding officer immediately. , up front. Inspection, halt. . Private Bensinger, sir. Yes, at ease. You know, I suppose that your father's interned as an enemy alien. Yes, sir. I'm sorry, but I have totell you that it will not be possible for you to gooverseas with the regiment under the circumstances. Yes, sir. That's all, I'm afraid. Aye, aye, sir. Good bye, Ma. Good bye, Pa. Goodbye, mule, with your old hee-haw. I may not know what the war's about, but I bet, by grass, I'll soon find out. And oh, my sweetheart, don't you fear. I'll bring you a king for a souvenir. I'll get you a Turk and Kaiser too. And that's about all one fellow can do. Fellows getting everything you wanted? Well, almost. That's fine. Nothings to good for our boys. Can I have a package of Sweet Caps please? Why, certainly, Eddie. Did you know my outfit wasleaving tonight, Mrs. Averill? I suppose you're awfully glad. You bet. Well, hello there. Hello, dear. Evening, Ruth. I'll be with you in just a minute Mr. Lawton? Yes, my boy? Could you do me a special favor? Doing favors is a Congressman's main job. Well, do you supposeyou could have me ordered over to France in a hurry? I'm afraid if I don't get over there pretty soon, there won't be any war left to fight. -- I wouldn't worrytoo much about that, my boy. Good night, Mrs. Averill. Goodbye, Eddie. Good luck. Thank you. NARRATOR: Under the commandof Admiral William Sims, since the declaration of war, US destroyers had been helping to rid theseas of the German U-boat, with the aid of a new Britishweapon, the depth bomb. For a year, US dreadnaughtshad been with the British fleet at Scapa Flow. Now, the efforts of a unitedAmerica were producing results. 1 million, trained and equipped, were ready to join their Allies. In May 1918 began thegreatest overseas movement of troops in all history. It was the citizen army of theworld's greatest democracy, to fight in a foreignland for American ideals. For those ideals, one man in every 20 was destined to give up his life. To the war-weary people of Europe, these fresh and determinedmen were like saviors. They had come none to soon. In the spring of 1918,Germany had launched her last and greatest offensive. The first contingent of Americans met their baptism of fire in theheaviest fighting of the war. Carrying on at home, men, women, and children were doing their bit,united toward a common goal. Look, Miss . 15 radishes. Have gone over the top? NARRATOR: In one single mammotheffort to help feed the Allied armies, to keep aliveEurope's 30 million refugees, the American peopleresolved that no sacrifice could be too great, for food would win the war. To keep the endless convoysmoving with their cargoes of food and materials of war,to replace the thousands of tons of shipping destroyed by German submarines, American ship builders were engaged in the greatest constructionprogram of all time. By the summer of 1918, more than a ship a day was going down the waves. Ships of steal, wooden ships,even ships made of concrete. To France in 1918 wentmany a US political figure, great and small. What is the type of your artillery support? We have in support bothheavy artillery and 75's. Thank you. NARRATOR: On French soil in the ranks of the AEF, 2 million strong, were many young Americans destined to be among theirnation's future leaders. And to the front lines went Franklin Delano Roosevelt, then the young assistance secretary of the Navy. Courageous to the point ofrecklessness, American forces by the fall of 1918 had sufferednearly 300,000 casualties, 50,000 killed in action. Eddie? Here's a friend of yours. It's Sean Lawton from back home, Eddie. Mr. Lawton? How did you ever find outwhere I was, Mr. Lawton. Oh, that wasn't so hard. Gee, I never expected to see anybody from back home way over here. NARRATOR: There were to be more casualties. But in the Argonne on September 29, Americans had broken Hindenburg Line, last strong-hold of Germanforces on French soil. Through the first week of November, there were repeated rumorsof German capitulation. A false report reachedAmerica that an armistice had been signed. But the war went on. Then, on November 11, 1918-- Hey! MEN: Yay! Hooray! The war's over. NARRATOR: It had come withbreathtaking suddenness. No event in all recorded historyhad swept the minds and hearts of men throughout theworld, with so deep and wild a fervour of thanksgiving. Vive la France! Vive le President Wilson. NARRATOR: It had taken fourlong years, from the combined efforts of most of the nations of the world, to destroy the great Germanwar machine which had threatened their civilization. The American community in the winter of 1918 was preparing to celebrate a new year. Americans faced their futurewith the confidence of a people who had accepted the gravest responsibility their age could offer. They had fought for andpreserved the way of life which was their American heritage. In a few minutes now, it'll be 1919. Dan, how about a toast? You know, I have never forgotten, and I suppose I never will forget, the President's words when he told us why we were going to war. I would say, to the things wefought for and won-- democracy, the rights of those whosubmit to authority to have a voice in their own government, the rights and liberties of small nations, a peace that will bring safety to allpeoples, and make the world itself at last free. NARRATOR: Guiding the Germany of 1940 and its war machine is a blueprint for world conquest, a book whichevery good Nazi knows by heart. Its title? "Mein Kampf." Its author? Adolf Hitler. "Democracy is a monstrosity,born of filth and fire. While democracy talks, we act. Borders are made by man,and can be changed by man. Germany will be the world power or nothing. Almighty God, bless our battles." First step to conquest in the Nazi scheme is to demoralize the enemy bypropaganda, to inspire fear, and to breed terror. At Bermuda, Britishcontraband control officers had intercepted tons ofNazi propaganda, destined to make the Americas fear the might of Germany's great war machine. Most famous piece of confiscatedNazi propaganda is an English language version of themotion picture , "Baptism of Fire," showing the horror and detailing the techniqueof the Blitzkrieg. Hitler used this film to soften up resistance in the European nations he was about to destroy. The appointed hour is at hand. The attack is geared for lightening swiftness and irresistible power. Total war is a sciencewhich Germany has mastered. The operation is directed fromthe Fuehrer's private railway carriage, for the Fuehrerhimself is the final source of all decisions and commands. The orders go out to the variousdivisions and commanders, assuring perfectcoordination of the attack. The first units tocontact the enemy of those of the German air force. The years of sacrifice todevelop this great air force have not been in vain. For thousands of planes willcarry the attack to every part of the enemy territory. Stuka planes, protected by German engineers, dive thousands of feet upon their targets. A Stuka pilot dives upon a railroad junction. To bomb the target, he aims hismachine directly down upon it. The task of the air force in total war is to attack enemy airfields anddisperse enemy concentrations of troops and material, todisrupt enemy communications far behind the lines, andto destroy the enemy's vital industrial centers. Against aircraft, suchantiquated weapons as armor trains are utterly useless. Because mastery of the air isvital to the lightning attack, airports, multi-million and military, are among our first objectives. But in a few days, theinferior air force of the enemy has been completely destroyed,and the German air force rules supreme. To halt the advance of our forces, the enemy has blown up his bridges. But detachments of engineers,assisted by Reich labor servicemen restore without delayany roads or bridges rendered impassable by the enemy. And our troops continuetheir advance unhindered. The lightning attack demands theacceleration of all movements. If bridges are scarce, German forces, even heavy mechanized units,have ways of crossing rivers without them. Meanwhile, parachute troopsare dropped behind the lines. These men are able to capturestrategic telephone, telegraph, and wireless stations, andcause great panic and confusion, particularly among civilians. Ranging far ahead of the mainbody of the army, divisions, small, mechanized,highly mobile units that penetrated to enemy cities far behind the main battle front. If the surprised enemy garrisoncannot be overcome with hand grenades and light artillery, their hiding place is sprayed with gasoline. The infantry follows themechanized divisions to destroy the main armies of the enemy. Hardened by long training, the German soldier has incredible physical endurance. Sometimes, he must advance 30or 35 miles a day, with no rest and little sleep for more than a week. The capital city of the enemy nation is reached within a few days. When the enemy does notadopt the reasonable course of unconditional surrender, this capital must, unfortunately, be destroyed. Nations which make war upon Germany must be prepared to face theconsequences of their acts. The enemy at last has noalternative but surrender. Because of his senseless resistance, the terms will now be less lenient. There is no possibility of compromise with the victorious German army. Vast quantities of war materialsof all kinds of been captured, more than enough to replace what has been lost for the German forces. Within the city, German soldiers are greeted by loyal friends and admirers. And every country,Germany has such friends. Those who have been of serviceto Germany behind enemy lines are given an opportunity to identify persons who have persecutedthem before the German conquest. Such persons will be shot. As a result of their mad desireto wage war upon Germany, hundreds of thousands of theenemy's most able-bodied men have temporarily lost their freedom. They will be formed into labor battalions and sent to Germany to help with the harvests, and otherwise, to take theplace of German fighters on other fronts. Under German supervision,many of these men will do useful work for thefirst time in their lives. The enemy is no more. Before the power of German armsand the terror of propaganda, nine once-free nationshave already fallen under the domination of Adolf Hitter. And upon German conquest,Hitler has set no limits. The slogan of his war machine-- today, we are masters of Europe. Tomorrow, we shall rule the world. Again, today, as in the years of 1917 and '18, the American people arepreparing to meet the challenge of might makes right. Overwhelmingly, we as a nation, we are convinced that military and naval victoryfor the gods of force of hate, would endanger theinstitutions of democracy in the Western world. Once more, the future of the nation, the future of the Americanpeople, is at stake. I call for effort, courage,sacrifice, , granting the love of freedom,All of these are possible. And the love freedom isstill fierce, still steady, in the nation today. Our way of life is in competition with Hitler's way of life. And I promise to out-distance him in any contest he may choose. And I promise you that when we beat him, we will beat him on our ownterms, and in the American way. NARRATOR: Today under leadersunited in their determination to meet force withsuperior force, Americans themselves once more standunited against the powers of aggression. And as Americans measure their nation's strength, they remember that there havebeen other times of crisis when the people of Americahave taken up arms. The founders of America fought for freedom and established theirrepublic by force of arms. Other generations of Americanshave fought to preserve it, and Americans today rememberthat their nation's courage has been tested under fire within the memory of men now living. MAN: Happy New Year! NARRATOR: For in their brave little world, Americans of a generation ago met crisis, and emerged fromit citizens of the greatest nation on Earth. Now, an old man, I'd like to make a toast. Through the generations yet to come, in peace, may they cherish that which weare handing on down to them. In crisis, may they unite and know as we have known the joy and strength of uniting. In war, if it should ever come again, may they hold the rampartsof our democracy and freedom until kingdom come. CHORUS: --the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air,gave proof through the night that our flag was still there. Oh, say, does that star-spangledbanner yet wave o'er the land of the free, and the home of the brave.